Chapter Two A ROMANTIC: ENCOUNTER 


---

The new Shererfa of Wazan had always been independcnt tuld strong-minded—perhaps fortunately, as these were th(: two qualities which.wauld help her the most in her new life. She had been difficult to control, even as a schooloirl. Once gTown-up, her singing had been thc bone of conten-tion. She had given recitals on the stage, brazenly, by her family's standards, showing herself off to an audience and being paid for it. John Keene had stopped this, though he might never have known of her activities she having the wit to keep them secret—if a friend had not attended one of her concerts and complimented him on his daughter's voice and looks. He had been very angry with her, but she was merely indignant that he 'chose to suppress her talent'. Eventually he won that battle, only to lose the next which began when Emily began to beg and plead to go abroad as a companion to Mrs. Ellen Varlet', an acquaint-ance of the Keene family. There had been good reasons why she should not go, but the house had been in an uproar when he refused. There was no peace for anyone until he agreed to recommend her for a passport. And on December 11th, 1871, aged twenty-two, she won the battle and received her first passport from the Foreign Office. Ultimately, john Keene could not prevent her from going abroad; she was old -(vl,ough to make her own decisions. 

Perhaps the oddest aspect Of Emily's extraordinary story is that she ever found herself in Tangier at all. It seems incredible that she was able to persuade arrival in Tan Varley—who by the time of her family into travelling  g a road with Elleri their arr. 1 • pus was calling herself Madame Per-


---
(Page 45)

Gaol. The Keene family bad held t he post for four generations, and it was a matter of course that Whcli KeenC cnior retired. his son, Fmilvs father,john Kecncjunior AcOUld Ovcr. 
All of her childhood was dominated by the gaol. It was a 0-rim place, described by Charles Dickens in Little Dor-rit as 'an oblong pile of barrack buildings 
partitioned into squalid rooms standing back to back, so thAt there were no back rooms. environed by a narrow pved yard, hemmed in by high walls. duly spiked on top...: 

It had been built in 1789 when it was the last word in modernity, designed by John Howard, the- philan-thropist. 
The Governor's house, where her grandparents lived, had a certain style. It was a three storied Georgian build-ing with a basement, double-fronted and with an elegant 
flight of stairs up to the big, curved front door. Unfor-tunately it was crowded in on both sides by the brick built wings of the Debtor's prison. 
The view from the front windows was on to the grim gateway, on the roof of which public hangings took place. 
The prison stood at the back of the Surrey County Sessions buildings (which still exist), and was eventually demolished in 1878.* 

Emily's father, John Keene, worked at the prison from the time his education ceased. 
He began as his father's clerk, and was employed in the same post when he married Emma Wharram, the dark-eyed daughter of the Coach-master at Newington Butts. 
The Wharrams owned a livery stable, fine funeral horses and a considerable amount of property in their area. The marriage was a happy one. 
John and Emma Keene moved into their own house at No. 6 Church Road, Newington—a short street of undistinguished early Victorian  houses owned by the Trinity House. 
Church Road ran from smart Trinity Square and down to the prison. The house was poky by Victorian standards. 
Naturally, there was no bathroom, the lavatory was at the bottom of *The prison area is now a charming garden and children's play- .. ground. 

-----------------

(Page 46)

11111. E ivi II' v 1 the ki.tichen.icn tchrelinciebniinirt jailRio leo, all" • I(' I iiir lock 4.3r( 1.6c-of. nut there was run 'Ise-.11)"().- 1 ificoovc - . Ow 0 c 0011 31 , , do (he work.. ificill "..':() ;1 1 1k7ecilY.1( ,11(. [rout, upstairs bedroom. on , ,,,irci ,,i, ... fro, Ili .. F,,,,IN 10, ,' ,. ,8,10. oiltsidc I Iic long windows 1()0 rtil('. ,1(■(1 11 I.  I le."")( 1 . . • .ind 11 WaS in I IIC V s, 7(11 ()• `‘":.) ii or i lie prS111, g a ' , car of i._,.. Ow ligiv 111, I,1/4 1,,„1,;1112,.s were hung publicly (on Nov" .r birth (10 '1 ' acafroid erectc(1 ou i lic great, gatem "1- vvay of ber oh) (row :i s the Prison. M.alirling, a small-tim .  .derick George 113c1Fr icnirricil a Swiss gill, Maria le Roux, who was by 1 I, the stronger character. Maria had been involved with a' Irishman, Patrick O'Connor, whom she could be idle  dri parting with large sums of money. But sometimes - not quickly enough to satisfy her husband's needs. Mrs. Mannings planned Patrick O'Connor's death at h house • Bermondsey. She and her husband bought a Sp cell' and lime, and one night when O'Connor came to d - a e _ _inner, they shot him dead. The Mannings buried him in the kitchen, and the next morning Mrs. Mannings went to his lodgings, ransacked his room and came home with a number of securities as well as ready money. So cool was she that for four days she sat knitting in her kitchen over her victim's grave. Her husband, made of weaker stuff, found forgetfulness in a 
nearby public house. Eventually they separated she fled to Edinburgh and her husband to Jersey. 

The police exhumed the body and both were caught and brought back for trial. Emma Keene's husband and father-in-law officiated .31 the hanging. 

Left alone at home, with her two month old baby, Emma would have heard outside her window the howling mobs who hadgathered from all over London to watch the spectacle of two people dying. The scaffold 1.1a( been mounted on the top of the gate the night betoev the death penalty was to be enforced, and from the ead, evening through until dawn the crowds increased. Charles Dickens, a resident of the area, went to wa not the hanging but the crowd and was sickened by', bestial he esual behaviour. He wrote an impassioned letter to 1  

-----------------

(Page 47)
Times, condemning the whole practice of public execution and its brutalising effect on those who watched. 
But many more public hangings were to take place on the gateway at Horsemonger Lane and other prisons until the last was performed at Newgate Prison in May 1868. 
Newington Butts (now better known as Elephant and Castle) had already lost the country-village-by-the-Thames atmosphere which had been its chief charm only twenty years or so before. Overtaken by London, the borough teemed with people, was beleaguered by small-pox, cholera, murders and even the plague itself, and having been brought up in that area, perhaps it is not surprising that Emily was able to accept many of the barbaric practices of nineteenth century Morocco with such aplomb. Accustomed to the idea of public executions literally on her doorstep, the sight of the salted heads of rebels mouldering on the gates of Moroccan towns would not have seemed particularly horrific. Morocco had a small-pox problem—so had Newington. The lash was commonly used in the Maghreb, but then prisoners in London gaols were flogged, too. The murder rate in Morocco was probably lower. Though civilised on the surface, London in the mid-nineteenth century was in many ways a barbaric place. The Moroccan slave system was frequently preferable to the life of a tweeny. Slaves were property and therefore treated well—as members of the family. Tweenys worked harder—lived harder. And if Emily found the religious fanaticism of the Moors strange, she had the example of the same excess of emotion in the success of Mr. C. H. Spurgeon, the evangelist, then building his Tabernacle a three minute walk from her home. Mr. Spurgeon was able to pull in an enthusiastic congregation of over io,000 people on every occasion that he spoke. And nearby her home were the headquarters of a sect of Holy Rollers—not dissimilar from the Assoiwa Sect in Morocco—both of whom were off-springs of the whirling dervishes. All three religiously fanatical groups British, Moroccan and Turkish—fell into trance-like states, suffer-ing a kind of epilepsy for religion's sake. 


------------------

(Page 49)
red children and paid for the coals to warm the class-in froni their salaries. Keene would not have contemplated St. Mary's r°°101in 1: his children's education. Emily, as her sister recorded to boarding school when she was older, and it was 10nt t'llere that she learned t he rudiments or French, Latin and and also how to ride a limse. This was fortui-Gernisaile needed to be able to ride well in. Morocco. She titalso needed French—it was the language spoken by the European residents. Tangier's second language, Spanish, ivas made easier for her by the Latin Grammar she had learnt at school. She had the Keene family's gift for pickin tongues even though she never spoke them g up foreign P grammatically. By the end of her life, she had mastered seven, including Arabic. Her great  grandfather had been a scholar of Hebrew, Greek and Latin. She had inherited his gift, and it could not have been more fortun-ate. The Keenes were entirely typical of their class and period. They were religious. Emily was christened at Trinity Church the same at which some unfortunate met his doom in the music hall song of the period—and worshipped there until the family moved to the New Kent Road, when they used the Parish Church of St. Mary's Newington. They were musical. Emily had the fine contralto singing voice which Ivas to lead her into temporary disgrace with her father, and shone at musical evenings, though living descendants remember with pain her visits home after the turn of the century when she played at the piano and sang interminable Moorish laments. The house was run Victorian fashion, with nursery, drawing room, dining room and the study cum smoking room where John Keeneplayed chess with his sons and where daughters were not permitted. Emily described this life vividly to the Shereef on their quiet ambles over the Mountain. He would listen and from her stories of the wonders of life in a great Metropolis, pick the flaws. Heprobed beyond Emily's own education and asked about the education of the poor—how thorough 
