(Page 7)

ompter Our THE IMPOSSIBLE MA R R !AGE 
Tangier, January 17th, 1873, on a bright .and windy North African morning. The town, always a noisy, changing con-fusion of race, colour, bargaining, selling and quarrelling, was for once united in one topic. Moslem, Catholic, Pro-testant and Jew all speculated; obsessed with the same subject—the marriage that would take place that morning at the British Legation. 
Morocco's holiest man, the Grand Shereef of Wazan, keeper of the Moslem faith in the Maghreb (land of the furthest west) was to marry a Nazarene (a Christian girl) and had divorced three wives of his own faith to do so. In the markets, the streets, the mosques and in the cool, luxurious homes of the European community all agreed that the alliance could only result in trouble. 
The Moslems were bewildered and angry. Holy men said that the Koran allowed such a union, even though Moslem women were not permitted to marry Christian men. 
Nevertheless, they believed that their holy Shereef had lost his senses and prayed for him. The people of the town also knew that even if the Prophet, by the will of Allah, had laid down that such a marriage was proper, the Sultan of Morocco himself disapproved of the cere-mony that was to take place that morning. 
They feared civil war, for already relations between the family of his Sherifian Highness, Muhammed XVIII and the Prince and Grand Shereef of Wazan were strained. 
The ma•riwe „, would further widen the gap between the country's two most powerful families. Not only the Moslems were concerned about the implica-

------------

(Page 9)

THE IMPOSSIBLE MARRIAGE 9 Sitting in the room with them was Emily's mother, Emma Keene. 
An authoritat ive, dark haired woman she could at times be more implacable than her husband, hut her no more effect on the daughter than arguments were having those of the father. 
Emily was polite and loving to her parents, but she could not hc pci-simd•d. J01111 KCCile tOOk coupic ul harassed turns up and down the room, finishing with his hands behind his hack, looking out over the bay. 
As concerned as he was, he must have noted its beauty and for a moment understood the seductive qualities of the country. 
But as seductive as the place might be, his attitude to both Morocco and his daughter was one of resentment. She had no right to embar-rass her family so. 
At 47 he was too old to go gallivanting around the world, leaving his seven other children to his second eldest daughter's care, in a fruitless effort to per-suade a daughter not to marry some foreigner. He was deeply concerned as to the effect upon the Keene family's reputation when the news broke at their home town of Newington Butts. It would be difficult to live down. 
Even today families do not always view mixed marriages with equanimity. In 1873, the disgrace involved was serious to a respectable middle-class Victorian household. 
That the Shereef of Wazan was a man of considerable import-ance who commanded more power over the people of Northern Morocco than the Sultan himself, mattered little to John Keene. 
His future son-in-law was a Prince with a lineal descent that could be traced back without a break to the Prophet Mohammed. 
That this ancestry caused the Shereef to be regarded as a Saint by his people was not only by the way, it was ridiculous and embarrassing. 
The Shereef was admittedly good-looking and dignified. 
He had a fine face with bright dark eyes, boldly carved features, but he was not quite white. 
And not British. The situation confronting John Keene, who was an author-itative man of property, well-respected in London, was an unhappy one. 
The world conquerors and colonisers of Victorian England were not accustomed to the idea of their women marrying Non-Christians who were to be pitied for their misfortunes in being neither white nor Christian. 


---------------

(Page 11)


THE IMPOSSIBLE MARRIAGE 11 

Knowing his daughter, John Keene understood that the `formal permission' was no more than a sop to his dignity. 
If Emily had made up her mind, nothing would stop her. At twenty-two she was legally of age to make the decision for herself, regardless of the family's feelings in the matter. 
After long discussion, lie and Emma Kccue decided that the rest of the family must be 101d. Will) Emily arriv-ing, plus two Moroccans. Newington would be buzzing with gossip. 
Their biggest problem must have been concern that the notaries would not be too conspicuous, and what was to be done with them? 
Should they stay in the house? Indeed would a hotel even accept them? Emily's letter vas the end of Emma Keene's plans for her eldest daughter. 
She herself had been married at St. John the Evangelist, Westminster in 1847 and had saved her veil and dress for her daughters to wear when they married at their own Parish Church of St. Mary's Newington with all the family and friends present. 
This could not happen if Emily were to marry a Moor. Distressing recollections of Othello filled their mind. 
Were Moors black? The Keenes were to be disappointed as to the dis-creetness of the notaries. 
One gentleman, decidedly foreign looking though not negro, was robed from head to foot and brazenly dignified. 
The other was Portuguese and less conspicuous. 
Their arrival with Emily put all of Newington in a state of extreme curiosity. 
The visitors appeared barbaric in the bustle and modernity of the fast growing borough on London's outskirts, but they seemed to regard all of the town's advancement with a certain amount of superiority. The time they stayed must have been a time of embar-rassed misery for the Keene's, particularly when the local paper The South London Press went so far as to report upon the notaries' presence and speculate on their reasons for being in London. 
One, a M. Felus, who was also a Khali fa and an import-ant man according Co Emily, had as the Shereef's represent-ative, asked for Emily's hand in marriage to the Prince he served. He spoke good French, and John Keene, a linguist himself, reluctantly acquiesced, using the same 

---------------

(Page 13)

THE IMPOSSIBLE MARRIAGE contracts; complicated documents which safeguarded his daughter as much as possible, but appalling in the prac-ticality and lack of emotion which the clauses revealed. 
Reading the promises the Shereef had made, John Keene (who held to the British view that to anyone other than an Englishman, promises were piecrust) could not help but think how unnecessary the whole thing would have been if Emily were marrying a man from her own country. 
The knowledge that a Moslem was allowed four wives plus as many harem women as could be supported was always foremost in his mind. 
The contract contained a clause that the Shereef would take no other wife, but John Keene had no faith in the legality of such a document in a country where women were considered as property. 
His only consolation was that the Shereef planned to settle in Europe Nvith Emily a short time after the wedding, though he must have quietly hoped they would not decide to make Newington Butts their future home. The notaries had been extremely businesslike. Once the contract had been signed they enquired of the bride if indeed her father was her representative in the matter. `He is,' said Emily serenely. 
Already she had acquired the dignity- which together with her strono--will was to stand her in good stead in her new life. She had always had more than her fair share of downright unfeminine confidence, but now she suddenly seemed totally adult and sure of herself in a way her parents deplored. Because the marriage pained them so greatly they missed the most important point. Emily was in love. A sensible girl, she was pleased that financially her future appeared to be assured. The Shereef was a very rich man. 
But more important was that she cared for him very deeply. She was genuinely passionately in love, so much so that her meeting with her husband that night needed great restraint. She returned to the hotel glowing with happiness. 'He said,' she told her parents, 'that rye are already man and wife by Mohammedan law. But 1 told him -not by Christian principles.' Her words made the fact of the marriage unpleasantly clear to Emma and John Keene. The wedding night would 

---------------

(Page 14)

EMILY 20 
thing very unusual in 'The Morocco. riddled with superstition and , 'Te people are very complicated it makes their lives, too,' she said. 'Skill (4 We go?* She smiled at her parents. icinotini•d licr horse and set off down the narrow road, the negro slaves trotting. at her side. Emma Kccne NN,as angry hut sir John stepiwd in to smooth OVer the situation with offer to escort Fier and her husband back to the hotel where the guests we-ri! waiting. First to arrive at the Victoria, Emily slipped upstairs to her room where she changed from her riding habit into an elegant white silk frock embroidered all over with little green sprigs. It had a bustle and the skirt swished in a most satisfactory way. The bodice was liberally frilled, but still showed off her fine shoulders and she debated whether to leave her hair free or whether to coil it up on her head. Reluctantly she decided it would be more discreet to put it up as the sixty invited guests were European and might well think her unladylike if it were left the way her husband preferred. She decided to wait until he reappeared before returning downstairs. If possible she wanted no more clashes with her parents that day. About half-an-hour later she heard a disturbance in the street below and, looking from her window, saw that the Shereef had returned. It was a fine sight. Flanked bv a guard of Moorish soldiers his progress was impressive. The soldiers were turbaned, robed in white with splashes of red. All were fierce bearded men from the Riff Mountains, who carried long, heavy flintlock rifles. Bv now sonic' of the male spectators who lined the streets had put On their gala dress for the Shereef's benefit—large muslin Kaftans, wound about by white robes. The crowd pressed forward to touch the hem of the Shereef's robe and to kiss his foot as he sat above them on a white horse. Emily thought he looked very splendid. Her parents, watching from the ground floor windows were less impressed. Emma Keene wanted to know why all the ragged men 111 

---------------------

(Page 15)

I II I I r I I It I I A 14 I A ( I 
11114 IN Ind fuggy(' .1! the in her titttied the ►itt,, 1,1 1 ht. ht,,,u1 tind ined • Mid d t)1 Iti1rCTOWd %IN') %Ailed Oill Side 1 Ii(^ 1itqC1 st*c Iii I if 1".• A low Imuing minium wcnt up AN She hesitated in the 11(.11 ink; it \ (11 ( 1)(•1 •if up talk' and tw.hit t‘iii1( sh‘t timiltdc }HI-, 'ruling 110rSe ‘Vith (111.(*C Whit(' Stu( kings and a lvhite pure Alai), untouched by the li•avy (arthory „113,11 thm ,Ippcalcci in so in.Inv Moroccan Itors aftel B1iti,11 10‘.111\ tniYAnitictil‘ pi( ,sunteti thc. Sultan with a shn( hotsc th.tt sited considclahle Fn i1' glOC•\ ( ( 11()-11 to match h•t hair, wore a brand ncw sad(11(‘, int •ngli,I1 idle and a led saddle (loth etigcti ‘‘ith thi(1, gold 1.1, .•, 1 hci r was it riding whip in %they And silver spills. All !(' \‘cticling gifts from her husband. Iwo (1,11k-skinned N1.1\ es, their laces impassive, aited to attend her. 

Emil% Keene rode to her ‘vedding, whic h pleased both her and her husband, She was a finc horsewoman, and their romance had begun because of a horseback meeting. Residei,, it was either that or walk. In ts7:,, Morocco had known and forgotten the wheel. 
It had rolled out of exist-ence in the land of the far 'West when the Romans left about 400 A.D. The country possessed no roads, no rail-142%4, barely a cart-track since there w,-ic no carts either. Hone, mule, donkey- - or foot- weic onh methods Of 4nport4t ion. Her parent% walked the short distance to the legation on Tolgieet ane square. ‘Fhe‘ pit Led theit ‘‘.1‘ o‘ri thy intigh Otect%I1t.tt I ►fri through the hostile .11141 ""W44, (vela tile rxplimtitrie cittalit‘ 01 1114- mob who had *uttered to w4tch thr ill 1,1k. (-won In the ha‘, the-InAtt m 1 h 1ttt kurnr kid itop•od to Like his dAtightet t, f‘sint,- Itniti krytic war tuti twill 0.1,1 cal thy 1"roOw thsji And 0,t lAttoN It trued  ptototive *conic tic,in the III it 401 Kati, %ifitontuleti 11" "" auk And 141-Att-tung Luc% I.tntnA tkoe-nt-mull on to het hukhoui % leper) het An t% tiOnt thy 

-------------------------
(PAge 22)

22 EMILY character in a famous play. Ile was a brave, fierc and "Lead on, McDuff," has become a sayine -an g°I shall call you McDuff.' `Brave and iieicc, (Ai?' like that.' They lveve ;don(' l)gc(11(,) tut he first timo that d and Hwy slow•cd down I 1c 11 hi,;(-4 kiting {I. 1.111, crowds. (-1,11110'1ring hicing, had hvens1,(:itf,tti:rik:thfiiir'r:ri,ri fires- blaic t hat I -tn fled hills and o( ( rimson touched the white of the houses behind them with 1 • (t)(1,k•I‘i111.1v1.11\- 111 y1,1(1,1 \1,1i(11,NyTeti: jait111_,,) pink. 'I know NNTIly your ancestors christened this the sun-set land.' Emily said. It was because it was as far west as they could go, he said, 'but it -svas a pretty choice of phrase. A.ska el Maghreb. Your first lesson in Arabic.' `Yes,' she said, her eyes on the beauty of the sun-set. `I shall have to learn now.' She found she had much to learn, even on her wedding night. The Shereef's house was swarming with relatives, servants, and dependants. Marriage was a very public affair in Moslem lands, and as yet another facepeered at them from behind a pillar or arch she wished for moreprivacy than the house could afford. She complained a little, but he was not sympathetic, explaining that had she been a Moroccan girl for the first seven days of their marriage he would only have visited her at night and she would have spent her days withyoung women while waiting for his return. And,' he added warming to his theme, the marriage would have been very different. As you are not a Shereefa. you would have been obliged to come to me on foot. as near to dawn as possible. The seven days before you would have been in seclusion except for visits to the haninuttnnt—She interrupted to ask what was the hammanon? The bath. Brides must bath every day for seven days before a wedding.' Emily said rather crossly that she bathed every day as it was. 

-------------------

(Page 24)

24 EMILY  It had been decided that Emma Keene would in Tangier with her daughter for a period of :.aY On  t trite camp Illifor the Shercef 111(1 Shereefa to find perm-,. pack and prepare 11 help over any problems that might lie ahcad and mc to () Fel un to Ent ope when hell) ft orri there. They had almost dccided As their ftiturp might take some time. Notlting was done in but the Shelve!' hmi his affairs to wind tip, whi(h fir-"jn't taste trip 
Alaghreb. John Keene decided to return to England immediately His wife seemed to have accepted the fact of his claughtfl. marriage, but he could not, and in any case, he could not stay away from his work indefinitely. 

A worried and unhappy man, he set out for Gibraltar on the little paddle boat Hercules a few days after the wedding and on arrival there was aghast to find that the Gibraltar Chronicle had printed the story of his daughter's marriage in full mocking detail, adding: Tor the benefit of any of the fair countrywomen of the bride who may be disposed to follow her example it may be as well to add that the Shereef now has four wive, that a Christian marrying a Mohammedan forfeits the protection of English law, and that Mohammedan hus-bands are by the Alcoran (Koran) (Chapter 4, verse strictly enjoined to beat their wives in case the latter are disposed to be refractory.

The story had also been picked up by the London Times which thundered in its usual way that her action should be taken as an awful warning to others, saving: This unfortunate Christian girl who makes four wives (for the Shereef) and has no protection from the law.' The Times, too, added chapter 4, verse 3 of the Koray to their report. John Keene did not know at this tinui that his own local paper, the South London Press, ha( also run the story, and that London was buzzing with gossil about Emily's rash and un-British action. He did know that he was monumentally angTy at th intrusion into family matters, the cheapness of the collo end the insult to his daughter. Whatever he felt a o 





-------------
(Page 33)

At M A ss i 1 4 
ti l 1 1 14 I nsitl %%11'i 1(1 t I)\ the spct ial t. 11,0ittt Ir (ma witItC th"“.1 ih 101 his papc1 
111 1(117' .1111(1111;1111111‘ (:t ,he\ A  wen iii m thy distani c. t ushinticd 1Fi ttctt „2j hillside, tx-i• idlite flat tools I \ing -4,11)4 )‘ anothei like the nwhic steps of a statclv staitcase, Owa • ll t tov,r1s, of 1 he mostincs picicing t ht, air, and Owh multitudinous coloured flags of .111 nations fluttering above Ow variutp, constil.'tc s. lint in this, as in many (Owl it is distance lends enchantment to thy of tubs puts out to meet us; we dem (.11(1 into one 111:11111cd by a brawny negro 2,nd a Moor, and put oil fur shot c that is, for as near the shore as our landing will allow. 

The instant the boat ds, while we are yet s,,tue fifteen yards from the beach, a lot of wild fellows in skull-cap, and shirt tied at the waist. and short cotton drawers, plunge into the water and advance to meet us. On they come till they are -deep, and before I well know what he is about. the foremost seizes me by the legs, slings rue athwart his shoulder, and wades to the land. This is the undisguised mode in which the Frank make5 his appemna among the Moslems and Barbary.' !.; I ,"/Idi 41 i Turk %vas a lit t lc more la( om, 
(.1)ondent I). ;t11tttejlt rrit r 1 St 
the 
Eta-, paituliget .111 i‘ ing to be (Allied oil •liolltarlI h: fAigit t hr it,f1.311too, %MO . hr Mot)t not t I the thl% Inc' (1"►1(' P' ICS, %, And On 4%411-H40 Whfn 3n 31 1 1% .11 ust • tak, s plat r, the Chtivtual ttas to bc d ,hot t. 1,‘ the sp.Inutti Ana Ptgluttiew 1-4411r1 01.1111k ittittilrge,1 Is\ bring Ai tot m (f duets. but Aiwxy* amid f I (-Awing .anti gum tdYartg Cig ClOW41 14 JCS* Each jrw grit hold of i 011311 1)3! I All scramble int gitAny tinifik the 1song too ill 'mid and the 


