
(Page 57)

A ROMANTIC ENCOUNTER 57 l the sanctity and worship apparently did not make But all  Erie ndly relations with the Sultan. 
The Shereefs of wic)razan had the right to protect any man. whether he be rrinainal, transgessor or tax-eyader. 
It was their duty to --vive protection to all their followers. Their homes, like ilidolle_age churches, were sanctuaries. and they themselves ;d none of the ruinous taxes demanded from the ,eople for the royal coffers, and they received thdinary eir income, food and indirectly housing. as gifts from the faithful. It seemed the Shereef of \Vazan was the most influential and powerful man in Morocco at the time. but the Sultan would not have been unhappy to find a method of under-mining his authority, mainly because the Grand Shereef was strongly pro-European. From the Government's and the Sultan's view-point, this predilection was a serious matter. With the French so firmly entrenched in Algeria and snip-ing away at Morocco's Eastern frontier, it vas easy to see that a man with so much influence over the tribes of the North could he a considerable ally to France. The Court was afraid of him. It was history of another kind that she learned in her quiet investigations tvhen she found an excuse to talk about the Shereef to the people of the town. All were charmed by his good manners, but whispered stories about the manner in which he had become Grand Sherecf. And it was a story which can have done little to case Emily's decison as to whether she should marry him or not. Several contemporary writers tell the tale of the Sher-eef's elevation to the head of the family. One, Philip Durham Trotter sums it up briefly in his hook 'Our Mission to the Court of Morocco'* in the following way : He (the Shereefs father) had amongst other wives, a dusky consort from the interior who was gifted with all the cunning of her race, who was the mother of the present Shereef. When the old man on his death-bed, as is the custom. was asked to nominate his successor, he rep That lied: hat son of mine, who. at my death which is close at hand, 
* Published David Douglas, Edinburgh. 

------------------

(Page 67)

POLITICS TAKE A HAND 67 at all.' she said. from the very deep love which she felt for Yet a13— he first few weeks of married life were not husband- t r, inc, smooth. 
Pitchfork into Moroccan life, she Pr°' furniture gaudy and not particularly comfort-fo the und, he tried her best to subdue the effect with anti-able a—ci s chenille tablecloths with bobbles, family maca,ssars' and all the other paraphernalia that gave •an air portraits of an English drawing room. 
A walnut piano, upright d With brass candle-holders had been acquired and riaced in the main salon. But the decorations were the smallest of her worries. It was proving difficult to become used to the way the house was run. She had an English maid. a Spanish cook and two Moorish slaves for her own personal service, but the place swarmed with slaves. secretaries. gardeners and servants of every description. 
It also swarmed with less desirable inhabitants, for Emily found she was living in a Zowia, or sanctuary. This meant that an\ one, rich or poor, litigant or criminal. could claim the protection of the Shereef and Shereefa and remain under their roof, at their expense. Those seeking sanctuary we/ c. Nupposcol to) bring offerings, but these could vary from a little food milk or meat—to large sums of money. 
It was possible for Zowia to be highly profitable: it Nkas also possible to go bankrupt running one. Whichever way, li‘ ing there was not very comfortable. 
People would arrive for months at a time, and all their claims and complaints had to be investigated. Emily had no choice in the matter; the Shereefs ofWazan had run Zowias forgenerations; much of their prestige rested on this hospitality and help which they offered  freely to their people. The new Shereefa found herself enter-taining some very odd houseguests. 
Europeans in Morocco •had hard things to say about the whole function of a Zowia, believing that they were another form of income and extortion practised by the Shereefs against the ordinary people. But Emily with her sense of thrift soon realised that the expense of feeding a Moroccan nobleman, his wives and all his retinue for months at a time ,h a oula . have claimed sanctuary, could become 

------------------

(Page 73)

POLITICS TAKE A HAND 73 explained it was unlikely. 'While we are under the fie ;ri of the French. they cannot touch us. 
They can-protec"- tates my- prerogatives. Illy money and nor  touch 11:1 CIS not  touch you. callthe tconot a politically minded woman. 
She could not She svari'd why the French were able to protect them when understann-tn, did not belong to France, and was self-the ernea• ot entirely self-governed. the Shereef explained. 
The Europeans had, it seemed, many fingers in the pie. They had loaned the Sultan money: they brought in trade. 
And they had agreements with the Sultan that any Nloroccan citizen under foreign protection could not be touched by the Sultan's Government. 
It was a most complicated pol-itical situation• brought about by the fact that Morocco owed both France and England money. 
And it was a situa-tion which the Mu r(( f had (Act\ intention of exploiting. 
Emily was disappointed that protection had not been offered by the British Goma Site did not know that Iter husband approached Sit John Hay Drummond Hay before he NN( Tv to Ow Ftendi Ile had thought that with a British v,j1,. sir John ‘N►uld 11.1‘c immediately offered assistance, hut he had nt)t For \cr\ good rea4Ains, France had t►e gi•eil•st Acquisi-tory interests in Morocco. 
The British purely a( Icd as a stumbling block to the Frcntli ambitions. Sir John gave the Moroccans his friendship and advice, but would not become too deeply invols rd in any political situation which would harm his good rehtions with the Sultan. To have given the Wazanni's British protection at that time would have meant that the Sultan and his Government would have lost some of the trust they had in the British Consulate. The Shereef explained to Emily that he was of more Value to the French interests than the Sultan himself, because of the Wazan power in the North. The French think -v are using me but I am using them: he told her. 13V the igth March, 1S7s. es-en-one in Tangier knew what d happened and where the Shereef and Shereefa 
