(Page 208)

208 EMILY and arranged her in a shroud made from twelve yards r new calico. Her two big toes were tied together and nd -heort body turned to face the East. Two thousand People attend d the funeral in bright sunshine walking over ground e fresh green carpet put down for the occasion where the newnew grass sprouted tenderly after the heavy rains. It took two hours for the burial procession to reach the mausoleum at the Mosque a distance of a little more than a mile. A few prayers from the Koran were recited over the ready-dug grave, and the grave-digger covered the remains of Lalla Heba. Emily did not attend the funeral, though she watched from the roof of her home and heard the moans and cries of the mourners. There seemed little point in her enterinc, into a ritual so different from the one of her own church). she was not even sure that she would be welcome. And besides, what did it matter? She had lost her daughter. She would mourn her own way. She remained in Wazan for another week and then made the journey home. The Shereef was genuinely grieved by Lalla Heba's death, and their combined sorrow seemed for a while to bring them together again. Emily moved to his house on the mountain, earlier than in the last few years and she began to feel that perhaps their marriage might now settle into a steady companionship, althought events had killed much of the romance they once shared. Another helpful development was that Ordega had been suddenly recalled to Paris, having gone too far in his ambitions to be the man who delivered Morocco to his Government. The new minister who arrived early in 1885, M. Feraud, was a different type more intelligent, friendly and with great charm. He was also a first rate Arab scholar, a poet, an artist and an archaeologist. Possessed of more subtlety than Ordega, Sir John Hay Drummond Hay believed he might prove more dangerous in the end, but admitted with relief, that it was a happier prospect to battle wits against a man of Feraud's calibre. In July Moulay et-Touhami came home from school. He had done well, gained several prizes and learned to speak French perfectly. He began to teach the language 

------------

(Page 212)

EMILY di the boat. IC was suffering from gouty eczema and was heoini)ing to look his age. I ter heart went out to hire als ill) lean when Moulay Ahmed ran slitt.: saw his eyes fill ‘N, to meet him. no older brother running ahead. He hugged dud kissed the child and said Over his head: 'I almost think you should go back and fetch Motday —how we will miss him! Emily was half inclined to agree. Mouiay Ahmed was also miseral)le for a few days but he soon settled down, and Emily got down_ to the task of trying to nurse the Shereef back to health. On her return his drinking ceased and he began to recover but pro egg was slow, and the constant irritation and pain of his leg made him bad tempered. Finally the doctor suggested that it might be as Iva]. to take him up to the sulphur baths at Hammam Bougrarah near Marnia in Algeria. It was a difficult journey. The Shereef was ill and often delirious. Emily nursed him patiently until gradually his health began to improve. Their stay was fairly quiet as very few of the faithful knew that he was in Algeria, but once word of his presence did seep out letters came from the leaders of the tribes in the Riff Mountains asking if the Shereef would visit them on his return to Tangier. Their crops had been poor for several seasons and they wanted the benefit of his baraka. The Shereef agreed. It was his duty for one thing, for another the hunting was good, and then there was the matter of Yiasa. The Shereef was at first reluctant to take Emily on the journey but he finally agreed to take her with him. There were good reasons for his reluctance. Christian faces were unwelcome in the Riff, but Emily was determined not to miss the opportunity St to see the mountain fastness that was ill the most impenetrable part of the country. 'Oh. don't fuss. Sidi,' she said. tI am not in the least afraid and the opportunity might never occur again. Please let Inc come. You know perfectly well that I shall be quite safe withyou.' Sliereef looked at this wife; she was smiling the cajoling smile of her youth, her eyes bright and MIR' in a face tanned from their last journey. She was still an 

---------------
(Page 220)

220 her future might be.  che hod bccil ight be ton, LI lied for her flit ur(!. j.\ A Aaniition tor the shr1( crs d('( isim) for hcr not to join 1,17armi Thc ihes, said, wm, in a turbulent state monnd Waion, and it was not safe: for her R (1'3111. 1 stavrd away much longer than usual and on his return moved into his house near the town, leaving hcr alone on the Marshall. Her life could have been worse. The European residents of Tangier were fond of the Sherecfa, having quite f(yr-o-iN-en •her for once having embarrassed them. Everyone rallied around to make sure that she was entertained and had company. It was not a chore; she was a pleasant guest, always amusing and warmly friendly, never bothering others with her problems. That the problems existed every-one knew, though she never spoke of them. She was sitting at home quietly one day when one of her I‘-omen came to see her in the long living room. Emily had done many small services for this particular servant's grandchildren at different times, and the old woman was devoted to her mistress. Now she looked troubled; hovering in the doorway, a shapeless bundle in her striped skirt and loose blouse, her hair tied up in a cloth. She came into the room hesitated as if she were about to speak and then in a half-hearted manner bent over from the waist, legs planted firmly apart on the ground, and began to rub over the tiled floor which had already been cleaned an hour before, swinging her body from side to side as shepolished. Emily  was amused. The floor is clean, Fatima,' she said. The old woman straightened, embarrassed, and stood indecisive. Did you want to speak to me?' Emily said. lady. But it is a delicate matter. You will not be angry.' The woman had Come to warn her and to beg her to bring our revered master the holy Shereef hoine'. In Tangier the servant said, the people were plotting against 

---------
(Page 240)
only skin (kip, and much wound on the head, happily bruised• lay ct-Touhami was impi ison ed. After a per iod of in;irc°curation Wazan, he was taken to Tangier but he quite insane, and on being brought into the had become her, Sidi cl-Hadj Abdeslam, who still presence of his fat lives in Tangier, he wanted to assassinate him. Tle was at Tangier and some little time later was sent to a lunatic asylum in France, where he lived for several Nears, suffering from the strange delusion for a 'Moham-medan—that he vas Jesus Christ.' The whole of this episode was painful for Emily. she had a hand in bringing up Moulay et-Touh ami, and she wondered if she could be responsible in any way for his fixation on Jesus Christ as Touhami loved and admired her. Until the end, she was the only one who could control him in any way, and he would listen to her even when at his most dangerous. She wondered, too, if some form of insanity could run in the family. Nobody, thank God. she kne‘,-, could be more stable than her own two sons. but their father's be-haviour continued irrational and erratic. For the next two years she moved backwards and forwards between Oran and Tangier, always treading on egg-shells when in Morocco, as sometimes the Shereef was cordial. and at other times would revert to his old habit of sending for her and then refusing to see her. She noticed. too, that many of his European tendencies were vanishing with age. As his beard grew greyer, he moved more and more to the comfort of childhood-based Moslem thinking and custom. As a woman with deep religious feelings of her own, she could under-stand this return to his earliest source of reassurance. In February 1890 she was living in Oran and received word that the Shereef was ding If this were true she knew it was necessary to be at handwith her boys in order to guard their inheritance. In a strangely calm mood she telegraphed the Governor General in Algiers to send the boys to her at once. sold up her furniture and made the decision then and there to live in Tangier permanently. All the to-ing and fro-ing was 


--------------
(Page 244)

memoirs Emily wrote of the early days of his last illness  was still able to humiliate her. lvhen he  'Three weeks before my husband's death I was startled in he morning, by hearing his out of my sleep, vcry cady carriage drivcii to my door. It was the only one in 11',1S carried into the drawing room, while Tangier t hen. my bCdStCad W,1S (Wick!), brought down to tile dining room for his convenience. I le was rather delirious, and begged mc not to let him be poisoned, to lock up everything, (Nen the water, am! prepare his food myself. Then he fell into a comatose state and n g othin could rouse hi m m. I sent for a doctor, he said he could not account for his state; the only thing to be done was to administer beef essence, and this he would swallow from a teaspoon when I put it into his mouth. Towards afternoon he again revived, but would not hear of seeing a medical man, and I natur-ally did not tell him one had been summoned. Towards evening he insisted upon being propped up; then he tried toplay draughts with Moulay Ali and Mannie and would notpart with them until the children could not keep awake any longer. After extracting a promise from them to get up early and go to the mountain to shoot him a wood-pigeon, he let them go. Several people called, but only those who were not of his entourage would he see. He remained awake all night, towards morning he dozed, and I went to take my bath. I had scarcely commenced to dress when I heard a tremendous scuffling downstairs, and found my house invaded by servants and retainers from the Zowia. Poor things, I thought, they are anxious about their lord and Master; little did I guess the real cause of the army of women. I heard the Shereef talking and has-tened to take him the coffee I hadprepared •for him. Then what did I see; a woman dressing the Shereef as quickly as she could while others held him up on the bed. I asked the meaning of this, and. the reply was "Sidi's orders". He refused the coffee, and I remonstrated with the women on their procedure, hut all to no purpose. Presently the carriage came, his men hoistedhmhi tir  arms, and he was driven at a furious rate the short distance to the town. When the boys came back and found their father fled, it 

---------------
(Page 254)
EMILY 
Princess Beatrice and other visitors upon the wall and upon 254 a multitude of rabies: with a red woollen wrap on her shoulders. cheerful, unaire( led. kindly, brave. `She told me that fear never ( ;1111C into her life; that she could always enter into and undeistand the point of view of other people and take life as it came. "Perhaps,- she have been able to) keep my said quieth. -that is NV11V placc so long," Morocco changed. but Emily did not. In 190 G. 11, so_ Otis. who got to know her when he worked for the British his book 'Appointment to Fez': Embassy in Fct, wrote 'Rails seeing her passing on her mule, shrouded and swathed • her outer Moorish raiment would dash up to kiss her shoulder or the hem of her garment with all the signs of veneration. I can still visualise it as if it had taken place yesterday. the occasion when I myself witnessed such an incident. I could not tell that the recipient of this re-markable attention was not a Moorish woman, but even so such a reverent homage towards a seemingly Moorish woman struck me as so odd that I could not rest until from one of the Ambassador's daughters I had ascertained the key to the mystery.' The last letter that Emily wrote to her English relatives was in 1940, just two years before her death, and she was still articulate as well as interested in world affairs. But her health was failino-`Unusually cold weather here,' she wrote. 'and even extra clothing does not seem to provide the warmth required. I have been obliged to keep to my bed the last four days and stay there with an oldpetrol-can stove in the room to warm the cockles of one's heart. As for arthritis, it flies all over my body at times from head to toe, but I tell myself to grin and bear it and be thankful it is nothing worse. `Am glad to hear ofyour mother's remarkable recovery. My love and congratulations to Elizabeth (Margaret Williamson's daughter, who became a missionary) she must beaver clever girl, and no doubt John (Elizabeth's brother and Emily's great nephew) will do his share when the time arrives, He did. He was killed on active service in Sum-


----------------
(Page 255)
THE  NI A Z AiFR nee to the majority an Ito) which may never be d his sev_11 inan lit h,r 255 da ily tEhiva tiP ms A N ;)111pan it •0) PaSS" Local press .news _,Ive have wirchls r! Iflr sc yen, interesting. 1 he whole chn t of Atheists of a very dCgi adei )(! 1\1;1/1 P‘Irt 3 is aliso) 1 he ,y, must oc my mail has been hcityy, Foi (1'1". coining from Australia, Anicrica, ih(y, -1(4(:"'" I" t(•rs to d England and Scotland. Housckccoh 1)(', hontri;irk, asual monthly expenses. On )g ;iiiilost don". 44" benCe the season of the yearly /Y),Itu.11( Pr()Phf`t's r Afoulay Ahmcd's eldest son •is joiilal -gr-tril'ig(' to NT,(rA!. year. Fic will be presented to the Ki nurni" this 'My hand says "down tools" so with (Li' .1 ng of me .1. mucd Jove to all and best wishes for 194o to all. It nr-t • einterest you to know that 314 prophets in the Old TestarnY nt are also prophts of the Moslem.' e By then it was many years since herlast visit home to England, but she never lost t ; 1, ouch Witri family nor ceased to reassure them that her Christian belief 1:vas as strong as ever. But her eldest-rands bon, Shereef Moulav Hassan, who Ivas the Pasha of Ksar1 b' e e ir up until his retirement believes that towards the end of her life she turned more and more towards Moslemm T ks t ing. reassured by the similarities between the two creeds. She would have been pleased that her funeral combined aspects of the ritual of both. Another account of the ceremony survives. `Her burial was unique. First there was the burial service in her home read by the British Consul General. Her sons and grandsons formed aguard of honour around the coffin. which was draped with the Union Jack. The whole British colony and personal friends took part in this moving cere-mony. The interment took place next morning. The coffin was carried shoulder high by her grandsons in dead silence through a dense crowd of all nations and their official representatives and tenderly placed in a garden tomb. In the absence of the British Chaplain the British Governor General read the committal service. Later the Chaplain General of the Forces came especially from Gib to conse-crate the tomb and give a final blessing. For weeks after-
