PAge 29
...
d kid (11 pio, 11,1i lot tut, Lo hip, 4)1 16:41 1 el►iti IrclIVcr Bp ood Am, Ind was .1 111C1111W1 ()I 111e I i111104 jils,0 been cIe( t( (l h he RI 1%11 IWITIS,t, 111;idi Fellow Of he ROy;i i So( i( y d I\/ tido y of th(, ill LontiOn. Varleys gene! ally were a kiienicd hut of r (Ilti family. john Varley, Cromwell Fleetwood's of the great painters and art teachers of 11“: day, 'I urrwr ahere were stories of wild di nn( 3. had been his pupil, nd t  parties where Mrs. John Varley was thrown ..(J of-,s the rabk from guest to guest. As a family they were caught up in the current obsession with spiritualism and astrology. Ellen Varley was different from the family she had mar-ried into. A Miss Rouse, her father was a gentleman from Hampstead. She was remarkably good-looking with red hair and a naturally aristocratic manner. in later years her family referred to her as Queen Elizabeth behind her back and there was a distinct resemblance. She married Crom-well Fleetwood (named after two of his ancestors, Oliver Cromwell, and Admiral Fleetwood) in October 1855, when she was just eighteen and he was twenty-seven. 

She bore him four children. The young Ellen Varley was gay and luxury loving. Perhaps her husband had inherited a Puritan streak, for as the years went by he became more and more engrossed in his work, while she became increas-ingly bored. Then, early in 1871, Mrs. Varley went to Malvern to take the waters for her health. There she met the gentleman from Trenton, NewJersey, named Ion Perdicaris. The Perdicaris family had contributed considerable money to the Southern cause in the American Civil War. Ion's father, George A. Perdicaris, had been a Greek refugee and arrived in America under sentence of death from the Greek Government. For some time he had taught his own Ian-


-----------------------

Page 31

A ROMANTIC ENCOUNTER strengt h character, phis her (1i to Prole oppoowlity 10 MiVel, hift 11(111 with Jill ic choice. tolerant (Ike was ova '2 She W;IS ;11Y) ail ()X( eplioicIlly s loon. never interfering in wild shr considered 01 her Ow never P(,„pic's business. Complctely moi wonld never judge ot hers. Varley, who was only 51elcs iniOit also have been that Ellen twelve \ ciirs older than_ Emily, was using her as a chaperone to help conceal that the man she was travelling with was her husband. But whatever the truth of the matter, not the background to the Perdicaris affair was never discussed in front of the children of the Keene household. Emily's younger sister, Helena Winifred, who, many years later was to live for seven years in Tangier, wrote, not long before her death, a short history of her sister. She describes very briefly and in the circumstances, inicon" elusively, the events which lead up to Emily's arrival in Tangier. 
`She (Emily) was the eldest of eleven (eight of whom lived) children and our parents were very Victorian. My mother had a lovely voice and a favourite song -was called The Moorish Bride. I still have it copied out in her hand, and I wonder if this in any way influenced my sister's choice of husband. She was a high-spirited girl, clever and rather difficult to manage. She hated the perpetual nursery atmosphere of the home, and begged to be allowed to go to boarding school in London. Here she did well and was very popular with teachers and pupils. 'One day a new girl arrived, a very homesick little person, and my sister took her under her wing. This led to a lifelong friendship, and was really the foundation of Emily's romantic adventures. `I 'he grateful child begged her mother to invite Emily to their home for the holidays and she became a constant and very welcome guest. k: years passed by and on one of these visits her hostess Was dangerously ill. My sister nursed her devotedly, and by her prompt acI ion saved lier life. Her patient was Grateful and being ordered abroad, compa-- invited Emily to in her. her. This she gladly did, it being the great desire 


-----------------------

Page 41


A ROMANTIC ENCOUNTER 4] o.ria and Northern Morocco..He was the one man who Aloe  ould halt tribal wars and uprisings against the State. His position Ivas that of the man permanently in the Ill i The French Government wooed him on one side with the intention of ad h vancing t eir interests in Morocco and to enlist his aid to keep peaceful the tribes in Algeria which they had already colonised. The Sultan needed his assistance and goodwill for the same reasons, but resent-fully for it was well known that the Grand Shereef had European leanings. Should he throw in his lot completely with the French it could bode little good for Morocco's independence in the future. History European history—has categorised Sidi Hadj Abdeslam as a collaborator. This he was, but he was also apatriot who thought. He believed in the European methods of progression, and wanted the more advanced countries of the world to be permitted to trade, open bus-inesses and put money into Morocco. He wanted his country to step into the nineteenth century and was intel-ligent and politically minded enough to know that if Morocco was ruled and run in the way it was at present the eventual end must be annexation by a foreign power. He did not think that this in itself was a bad thing. But it was not possible to explain these views to a feudal ruler whose one intention Ivas to keep out the Christians. Men-tion of the subject would be enough to cast suspicion on himself as preparing the country for the Christians to take over. And how much more suspicion would he incur when he married that girl with the magnificent hair he won-dered? For he was determined to do so. At the time he met Emily Keene he was out of favour with the court. He preferred life in Europeanised Tangier than in feudal Morocco City (Marrakesh) or Fez where the Sultan resided. He was tired of being an object of suspicion to his own people and a pawn in the power game the French were playing. He had made up his mind to live somewhere out of Morocco,probably France, and settle down with a European wife. The Sultan, Sidi Mu hammed was well aware of these 


-------------------------

Page 63


ppippwwwwominommommigninemmemmimmi A tio%11 AN 1 It 1 Nit Ors / elm hills. .1 tit .11 tat! 111,411 IttAtt 0011411 - Himlii ro1a4'%, And .t t tagtarw old grnfit hoeing fed As (onsiel and pulse besart. Outiseir ton. "I"' till I tit IA( /1/4( (1 1)\ kind fit, I br di flirt' \Oat id' II" a • 11,41 ti p.isAt tagc s. Fhcv entered my it killed tin(i "*‘1"- ruNeti .11 1.1!,!.e. 1)111 piStOIS If) dB,' Ipanit 1%. Clet11.111dt'd gill t 11r11- 111011('‘ ettUl l'e.'.:)f4nabealing the (ommotion (in Ihr Einav fin t Ifil‘ hid ,lipped itlyclicr\ jilt() het ttockingt ind the Portugne,e gentleman had attended to his bank-tulto_ rho "Phi"rd the`- had nuthiug to gi‘c away. It and ni\ s aid the pistol 1.1.4 All . %, 1‘ kAssatd 1110mem  point kit \ CIA' (01(1. 1:0111111.1tch .1t t his 1110111ent theie ipas a Crk that the soldiets \%eie (,,ming. and the bandits fird, Thert was sharp fighting and se‘elal were The passengers had to get ()tit Nvhich was c,nsiderably knocked about and the passengers waited for 'antral hours in the snow before the relief train arri‘ed, 1"bev had no further adventures and arrived safelv in Loguion. which was enveloped in one of its worst black f and continued so most of the time of Emily's visit: Thr fufg muit have made the trouNscau shopping mote iumant, in horse and carriage in London, hut eventually thr dinc cAme for 14,:tuily to leturti to I angivr for lwr wedding. parents arcompinied In i , And oil hrt nodbet wrote. home to Emil‘'s st%tvt. trit j rr 11.11gy if lust of 'hub limit\ 

t 4, tit " 
rt I hut Wtitild bc %tit 11 WA\ diet s. saroltili $titi 41111 dittertlitigh (11 Mitt I It ihiv mutt agtre Q.ith tiii Ntov kit tic\N‘ Cults %ilk Him It 1\ It It illitiC I Ittilutt‘ tiltit al 7 fitiotk Anti then wr II gri into ,mull boat 14d bt, i„,,,,711114 to the ocastici \\ !At hct Lite anti starat rd without ti% 1 hr lxultntrti puiteti off had them uli And ti v., crtALirs 
