Madam Dragonfly: The Life and Times of Cynthia Longfield
Pentland Press of Edinburgh, 1991
by Jane Hayter-Hames

Cynthia Longfield was the daughter of an Anglo-Irish landowner. She became a naturalist and author whose books on dragonflies were the standard works for many decades. Self-educated in science, Longfield began travelling as a young woman after the First World War and later became the dragonfly expert at the Natural History Museum where she worked until retirement in 1956.

The family home in Ireland was burned in 1920, at the start of the Troubles. She went back and forth from London with her mother, to get the old castle rebuilt. One way of life was coming to an end, but her career as a naturalist was just beginning.

Her great break came in 1925 when she joined the St George expedition to the South Pacific with a group of scientists, to follow up Darwin’s research. She was invited aboard as Evelyn Cheeseman was the only female scientist and needed a female companion. They were at sea for eighteen months, visiting many remote islands to collect specimens. Cynthia was assigned to help Cyril Collenette and they fell in love. But despite further journeys together, Cynthia turned down his offer of marriage and remained single, to pursue her career as a scientist, odonatist and confident traveller.

Cynthia Longfield made collecting expeditions to South America, South East Asia, Canada and two long journeys across Africa in the 1930s. During the Second World War she joined the London Fire Service and helped to evacuate part of the Museum’s precious collection. After the war, now in her fifties, her journeys were less remote but she collected in Europe and went to international conferences which brought scientists together. She was in Moscow in 1968 when tanks rolled into Prague and she went to India as an elderly contributor to a conference in Delhi.

Cynthia Longfield was the daughter of privilege but the Anglo-Irish way of life ended dramatically for her when her home was set on fire. She had a speculative mind, which fed on her long journeys, and scientific reading giving her an unusual outlook. Compiled from extensive interviews, diaries and papers, Madam Dragonfly gives a personal account of a clever and adventurous woman with a wide understanding of the natural world.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Cynthia Longfield - Herstory Ireland's Epic Women | EPIC Museum

The international dragonfly expert and intrepid explorer also known as 'Madame Dragonfly'
Why is it that so few people know of Cynthia Longfield? She is by far one of the most interesting Characters in Irish emigrant history. Not only was she a skilled entomologist – a scientist who studies insects - and a seasoned world traveller, she also had what is probably the coolest nickname ever: Madame Dragonfly. In that old hypothetical dinner party scenario, Cynthia Longfield would most definitely be on my list.

Longfield was born in London to Anglo-Irish parents in 1896. Though she was born in England, she spent much of her childhood in her family’s home at Cloyne, Co. Cork. It was here that her interest in nature was fostered. She would spend her time, like most children, wandering the countryside, noting the insects, flowers and other critters as she went. She had an innate interest in the sciences from a young age, citing Charles Darwin as an important influence throughout her life. Longfield wrote that reading about his theory of evolution and his Beagle voyage inspired her to learn more about the importance of travel and fieldwork in science.
The Longfield family were devastated in 1920 when their ancestral home was burnt down by rebels during the war of independence. Despite their Anglo roots, the family considered themselves Irish and it was a huge blow for Cynthia’s father. Perhaps this incident is what spurred a restless Cynthia Longfield to leave and travel the world. Her first overseas tour took place in 1921, when she journeyed through South America, from the Andes to Lake Titicaca. This only furthered her love of the natural sciences and fascination with entomology.

In 1924, Longfield continued her adventure aboard the St George as part of a scientific, 18 month long expedition. It was a chance for Longfield to follow in the footsteps of her hero Charles Darwin, as the St. George was planning to travel the same areas that the Beagle had. Along the way, just like Darwin, Longfield collected various specimens. Moths, beetles, dragonflies and butterflies- Cynthia Longfield collected a veritable selection of creepy-crawlies for the benefit of the Natural History Museum in London, hacking her way through the jungles of the Galapagos with a machete to get them.

Upon her return, Longfield joined both the Entomological Society of London, becoming the first woman to do so, and later the London Natural History Society. She was elected the president of the latter society from 1932-1933. She became a volunteer at the Natural History Museum, she was lucky that her personal circumstances meant she could do so unpaid. She was a cataloguer primarily responsible for the museum’s extensive dragonfly collection and she was fortunate, as she spent about 30 years of her life being able to travel the world, hunting for new specimens to add to that ever growing collection.

Her expeditions included the Galapagos Islands, South-East Asia, Kenya, Uganda, Rhodesia (now Zimbabwe), and South Africa, all the while collecting countless dragonflies, moths and other bugs. In 1934 while in South Africa, she identified six completely new species of butterfly and dragonfly. She left Africa in 1937 for the sake of her health after contracting Malaria and by the time she was better, the Second World War had broken out, limiting her ability to travel anywhere. The advent of war did little to quell her devotion to science and natural history however. Even as a fire marshal in the Auxiliary Fire Service, Longfield ensured that the Natural History Museum was tended to after being bombed during the blitz.

In 1937, Longfield published her book “The Dragonflies of the British Isles”. The book quickly sold out and Longfield was nicknamed “Madame Dragonfly”. She retired to her ancestral home at Cloyne where she died at the age of 96 in 1991. Cynthia Longfield was the primary authority on Dragonflies in the world. Thanks to her extensive travels, she was probably one of the most brilliant entomologists to have ever lived. In her lifetime, two species of dragonfly were named after her. She was a formidable source in the field of natural history and science and her influence did not go unnoticed. There is no denying that Cynthia Longfield is a truly inspirational figure for any budding scientist out there.


---------------------------

Madame Dragonfly / Cynthia Longfield
banner%2Bcynthia%2Bref.jpg
I first heard of Cynthia Longfield as I was looking up a reference. I had found the reference while reading about migratory dragonfly swarms reported on the British Isles, and there are not that many of them, so when I saw the reference “Longfield 1948” referring to a swarm of Sympetrum spp reaching Ireland, I tried to track it down. And when I found it and my eyes casually skimmed across the title and authorship I paused. Longfield was a woman, a Cynthia. Automatically, my brain had envisioned an old man in a Fedora hat behind the Longfield name - because people were always old in the past and people who published papers were always men in the past.

Cynthia Longfield. 

That is unusual I thought, that Longfield is a woman, and I googled the name, thinking that maybe maybe, there will be some little snippet of information about this woman writing papers on dragonflies in the 1940s...  

Cynthias book.jpg
And Cynthia Longfield was not a small bleep in history, there was not just a little snippet of info on her. She was Madame Dragonfly, odonatologist extraordinaire! She described new dragonfly species, she wrote a guide to dragonflies of the British Isles that became so popular it sold out, she went to Africa and Brazil and she sailed The South Pacific Ocean.

Yet, I had never heard of her. And probably, neither have you.

Cynthia Longfield was born in London in 1896, but spent a lot of time in Cloyne in the countryside east of Cork, Ireland, where her family had an estate. As a girl, she was fascinated with wildlife and nature, and being born into the privileged class, her family had time and money to indulge her interest in science. The family home in Cloyne, Castle Mary, was burned down by Irish rebels the 19th of September 1920, a sad end to a castle dating back beyond the 1600s. But the 1920s was also a year of new beginnings for Cynthia Longfield. In 1924 she embarked on her first scientific exploration to the Pacific islands.

The St George was a research vessel setting course for the Pacific Ocean. The exploration was partially finance by the tourists that was joining the adventure, but the aim of the journey was to research South Pacific wildlife. Finally, Longfield was to embark in the footstep of her hero, Charles Darwin.

It took St George and its crew of 58 three weeks to cross the Atlantic and reach Trinidad in Central America. From there they entered the Panama Canal, and headed out in the Pacific Ocean, to visit Galapagos, Easter Island and Tahiti

Caslte Mary, Cloyne, after the fire in 1920
Caslte Mary, Cloyne, after the fire in 1920

Cynthia Longfield was by this time an aspiring entomologist, and she had brought notebooks and vials, traps and nets with her, the aim being to contribute to the collections of the Natural History Museum. She also had her mentor with her, Cyril Collenette. Interestingly enough, another influential female entomologist and traveller, Evelyn Cheesman, was also onboard, and had encourage Longfield to come.

Longfield’s childhood adventures and studies into British wildlife had made her fearless in the field and she was of a resilient generation. Cynthia’s grand-niece Jane Hayter-Hames, who wrote Longfield's biography, Madam Dragonfly writes "Her medicine chest contained quinine in case she got malaria and Epsom salts to act as a purge in case she got a digestive infection, and that was it"

cynthia 1920a.png
Cyril and Cynthia on St George
Cyril and Cynthia on St George

longfield crest.gif
Cynthia net.png
By 1925, Longfield was back in London and at the Natural History Museum, then known as the British Musuem. She had a rich collection and catalogue of specimen to sort and identify. The St George expedition had essentially made her career, she had left as an amateur, but returned as a fully trained entomologist. She joined both the Entomological Society of London, becoming the first woman to do so, and later the London Natural History Society.

The St George expedition was only the first of Longfield excursions, she also set sail to Mato Grosso Brazil in 1927, to south-east Asia in 1929 and ventured alone through Kenya, Uganda, Zimbabwe (then Rhodesia) and South Africa in 1934, where she identified six new species of butterfly and dragonfly, and travelled to Cape Town and Zimbabwe in 1937.

cynthia-lonfield-1896-1991.gif
cynthia+on+boat.jpg
cynthialongfield.jpg
Longfield stayed at the Natural History Museum her entire working life. In the beginning, she worked without pay, again relying on her privileged background. She had never had a formal university education, yet, with her talent for entomology, intelligence and professionalism, she became a self-taught, leading expert on dragonflies. 

In 1957, at 61 years old, Longfield retired back to Irish Cloyne. From there, she continued writing and travelling, going to Malta, Russia and Australia, but also she had a rich social life. "She was very charming and she loved parties, she would be the last person to leave," her grand-niece Hayer-Hames recalls. "She would have a crowd around her and she would tell them stories about when she was in Africa. There would be young men there listening with their mouths open." 

When Cynthia Longfield passed away at 94 years of age, 1991, she had authored 9 books, written 32 scientific papers, described several new insects species and had a library containing more than 500 natural history books (donated to the Royal Irish Academy). 

Atoconeura kenya by Viola Clausnitzer
Atoconeura kenya by Viola Clausnitzer

Urothemis thomasi by Huw Roberts
Urothemis thomasi by Huw Roberts

Micromacromia flava by KD Dijkstra
Micromacromia flava by KD Dijkstra

The following new dragonfly species have been described and identified by Cynthia Longfield:

Atoconeura pseudeudoxia (Longfield, 1953), Hairy-legged Highlander

Atoconeura kenya (Longfield, 1953), Kenyan Highlander

Micromacromia flava (Longfield, 1947), Angola Micmac

Nesciothemis, (Longfield, 1955), a genus of dragonflies

Tetrathemis corduliformis (Longfield, 1936), Club-tailed Elf

Urothemis thomasi (Longfield, 1932) Desert Basker

------------------------------
 

The following species have been named in honor after Cynthia Longfield

Castoraeschna longfieldae 

Coryphaeschna longfieldae

Agrionoptera cynthiae

When I visited the entomology collections at the Natural History Museum, I stumbled upon specimens collected by Cynthia Longfield. As I had heard of her by then, it was really thrilling to all of a sudden sit in front of a dragonfly that this world explorer and extraordinary person had caught and touched!

