Prague FRINGE
My Fringe

About
Artist Info
Prague Tips
 
Fringe 2027Artist Info26th Prague Fringe (May 2027) - Artist Applications OPEN AUGUST
26th Prague Fringe (May 2027) - Artist Applications OPEN AUGUST
26th Prague Fringe (May 2027) - Venue Info
26th Prague Fringe (May 2027) General Info/ Artist Toolbox/ Updates
2nd Mumbai Fringe Festival
26th Prague Fringe Festival - Application Info
The artist application window for the 2027 will open in August.
 www.eventotron.com 
How the Festival Works
Prague Fringe - brief overview
 
Founded in 2002 by Scot Steve Gove, Prague Fringe Festival is the longest-running festival of English-language theatre, comedy and performance in continental Europe.
Our festival takes place annually at the end of May in the centre of historical Malá Strana (The Little Quarter) district of Prague nestled between the famous landmarks of the Charles Bridge and Prague Castle.
Over six-days, we programme approximately 30-40 productions in 5-7 venues.
Like other Fringes, each venue runs several hour-long performances each day with 30 minutes between each show (15 minutes between comedy shows) to clear the audience, reset and seat a new audience, experience over the years has shown that even technically demanding shows are able to fit this time schedule.
As we hope audience members will see several shows each night we programme the performances so you can see a show, have a drink, then go back for another show. 
 

Who are the current team: 
Steve Gove MBE - CE, Founder and Director
Alena Kopečná  - Special Advisor
Tereza Kočová  - Social Media Manager
Simar Singh - Comedy Producer
Technical Directors - Charlie Willis-Osborne & Alys Woodhead
 

Angus Coull  - Co-Founder and Board Member (Founder & Director - VoiceFest Brechin)
Giles Burton - Co-Founder and Board Member (Director Nelson Fringe)
 

 
 
 
Key dates in the application process
 
August 2026
Open call launch, the application window is opened
End October 2026
Friday 31st October at midnight HST
By early/mid December 2026
Offers issued to successful applicants 
By mid/ late December 2026
Contracts signed, participation fees paid
May 28th - June 5th 2027
26th Prague Fringe Festival
 

 

What we are looking for
 
Prague Fringe is in the English-language theatre, comedy and performance festival of the Czech Republic.
We have a very varied audience comprising Czechs, Non Czech residents of the Czech Republic, and tourists/visitors from across the globe.
A certain percentage of our audience members are therefore non-native English speakers for this reason we also programme completely non-verbal shows.
NB We do occasionally accept other language shows but artists much supply supertitles in Czech and English for their show.
 
Special Area's of Interest for 2027
Scottish work - we will present a Scottish Season to celebrate the roots of Fringe - Edinburgh in 1947
Taiwanese work - we will present a Taiwan Season for the fourth year running. 
Indian work - we will present our Festival of India for the third year running. 
Work from New Zealand - we will present a Kiwi Season for the first time.
Italian work - we will present an Italian Season for the fouth year running. 
Queer work including trans related themes which will fall under the banner Queer Fringe.
Low tech/ vocal work - we have a new venue that we will work with in 2027 - Fortna under the banner Fortna Season - a fantastic multi space building which is a working monastery. 
 
Applying shows should fit the criteria as noted below.
1)     Shows with a running time of 1 hour. We are occasionally able to accept shows with 30 or 90-minute duration but the standard slot allocation is 60 minutes (or just under). Shows longer than 60 minutes will be charged additional participation fees - further details will be provided if your show is selected. 
2)    Theatre (including physical theatre), comedy, improvisation and storytelling are the genres that our audiences tend to be most attracted to and that work best in our venues.
3)    Children’s Theatre. There is a high demand for English/non-verbal shows for young people, especially those with low-tech requirements/flexible staging.
4)    Not bands. Unfortunately the majority of our venues aren’t suited to complicated live amplification of multiple instruments. Acoustic (or very low-tech) bands and singer-songwriters do work well however, and have been popular in previous years.
 

 
Applications, finances & practicalities
 
PARTICIPATION FEE SUMMARY HERE
 
Detailed info on TYPE A venues (and Café Club Míšeňská) including floor plans and photos can be found HERE  details of these and all other TYPE B venues are available in Eventotron in the Venue section.
 
 

Application Process
Our independent panel of theatre professionals will review all applications based on the following criteria: 
Distribution of countries represented
Range of performance types (theatre, text based, comedy etc.)

Fit of shows to venues

Quality and detail of application

Technical practicality of the show within our venues and/or the operating structures of the festival

Limited choice of date/venues for us to work with in application

Balance of returning companies/shows to first time participants/show premieres
 
Successful Applicants 

If you are selected to perform at the festival you will be required to enter into a contract with Prague Fringe detailing dates, venue ticket prices etc. 
Your company will be charged a participation fee, details of which can be found below. The amount due is determined by the venue and the number of performances you have requested (full breakdown of costs in the link below).
Please note that these costs are per 60-minute performance slot used (i.e. 6 slots in our largest space: 6 x 3,500 CZK = 21,000 CZK). Shows longer than 60 minutes will be charged supplementary participation fees - further details will be confirmed if your show is selected. 
This fee must be paid before mid December (exact date will be confirmed in due course), along with a signed contract in order to guarantee your inclusion in Fringe 2027.
(You will receive details on exactly how to pay and submit these items if your application is accepted.)
NB: Show performance times will be confirmed closer to the time, in March 2027. 
 
Practicalities
Time Slots - are 90 minutes each. Broken down into 60 min show time and 20 min get-in and 10 min get-out. Your performance times will be confirmed in early 2027. 
Door split - Companies take a 60% cut of the door sales, minus any central box office handling fees (8%) and VAT (12%), as well as any additional optional expenses (such as lighting operator), which will be transferred into your account before the end of 22nd July 2026 once all ticket sales are accounted for.
Ticket Prices – Ticket prices were increased in 2026 to 300 CZK in advance and 350 CZK on the door (approx 12 and 14 EUR). There are no discounts for students or seniors - prices are kept low for all.
We reserve the right to introduce special ticket prices and offers to boost overall sales – specific details to be included in the final contract issued in December.
Please take careful consideration of the finances before applying. 
 
Other useful information
Accommodation - Prague Fringe does not provide accommodation for incoming companies. Please check HERE for tips on which areas of Prague to stay in and details of our accommodation partners.
Transport to Prague - Prague Fringe does not cover the cost of any travel expenses to the festival.
Other costs - The general cost of living is still cheaper in the Czech Republic than in other EU countries. For example, 0.5 litre of beer or cup of coffee: 50 – 80 CZK (approx 2 - 3 EUR. Main course in an average priced restaurant 300 CZK (approx 12 EUR).  Further information available here: www.expatistan.com/cost-of-living
 
Venue and Participation Fee Summary
 
The participation fee helps to cover:
Venue costs - where applicable
Initial get-in/rehearsal time - varies depending on venue
Festival Programme – the show will be included in the Fringe programme online
Generic Marketing – see the ARTIST TOOLBOX section of the website for more information (NB this will  be updated and modified closer to the 2025 festival)
Generic Administration - throughout the year
Technical assistance during get in/ rehearsal time (Excluding Type B venues.) An extra fee applies for operating shows, see How the Festival Works: Technical and Production Information below.
Basic general cover lighting and sound rig - where applicable
 
PARTICIPATION FEE SUMMARY HERE
The participation fee is our all-in-one festival attendance fee.
There is no separate registration fee.
There is no separate theatre rental fee.
There is no separate programme entry fee. 
 
 
NB: The Participation Fee Summary should be treated as a rough guide as not all the venues have been confirmed and fees may change slightly depending on final hire rates (where applicable etc).
Prague Fringe will liaise with you regarding the appropriate venue on consideration of the requirements of your production.
Please note that the lower cost of some Venues reflects not only the lower seating capacity but also the fact that they have very basic or no technical facilities, as well as the lower cost (or no cost) of rental to Prague Fringe.
 

 
Venues - brief overview
Venues - detailed venue packs and floor plans
Technical and production information
Online Application Form
Contact Us
Privacy policy
Terms of Service
